---
title: Cub3d - 2d game Rendered as 3d like oldschool Doom or Wolfenstein
date: 2024-06-04 10:20:00 +0100
categories: [Game development, Graphics, Low level, C Programming]
tags: [Minishell, Shell, Command Line Interface (CLI), Bash, Abstract Syntax Tree (AST), Interpreted Programming Language, Interpreter, Binary Tree, Child Process, Process Management, Input/Output (I/O), Output Redirection, Pipes, Signals, Logical Operators, Shell Scripting]
render_with_liquid: false
---

### Launch :
  ```
make && ./Cub3d map.cub
  ```

### Plan :
#### I - What is Cub3d?
 - The subject
 - Understanding the project
#### II - How did I make Cub3d? 10 steps
 - step 1 : Parsing the .cub file
 - step 2 : Understanding the minilibx and printing squares and triangles
 - step 3 : Create the minimap to learn how to use the Minilibx
 - step 4 : How to retrieve keys and use them in the minimap
 - step 5 : Raycasting without textures in practice
 - step 6 : Adding textures
 - step 7 : Sprites
 - step 8 : --save
 - step 9 : The last small elements
 - step 10 : Leaks
#### III - Useful things I've learnt
 - Debugging techniques
 - VIM
 - Git
 - Reminders about pointers

# I - What is Cub3d?
### The subject
This project is inspired by the game Wolfenstein 3D. Wolfenstein 3D is considered to be the world's first FPS (first-person shooter). 

- The aim was to create a dynamic view (one that adapts over time according to the player's movements)
- and subjective (we see from the point of view of the character's eyes)
- within a labyrinth with a "realistic" 3D graphic representation, in which you have to find your way. 

This project is an opportunity to explore the ray-casting technique (ray-casting is a rendering technique capable of creating a three-dimensional perspective from a two-dimensional map).

### Understanding the project
I started by watching this video to get an idea of the principle: [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=js7HW65MmNw&list=PL0H9-oZl_QOHM34HvD3DiGmwmj5X7GvTW) 

# II - How did I make Cub3d? 10 steps
## Step 1: Parsing
### To do :
- Parsing in a double-entry char array (it's also possible to parse in an int array, but I preferred the char solution).
- Check that the map is surrounded by walls
- Each time go through the function that checks that the characters in the map are 0,1,2 
- Each time, go through the function that checks whether the player is in the map (i.e. whether there is N, S, E or W) and if the player is there replace with 0 and store the player's position and direction in a variable.
- Create an array of character strings
- I've added 1's before or after so that all the lines are the size of the largest line
- For the malloc of map** I read a first time to find the size of the longest string in the map + the number of strings in the map
- Malloc the array with the number of char * in it
- Then mallocate string by string in the array
- Replace all the spaces with walls + add walls at the end to make the size of the string big enough

### Remember to malloc an array of strings :
  ```
  char **list;
  char *ptr
  list = malloc(sizeof(char*) * nbrofstrings)
  list[i] = malloc(sizeof(char) * ft_strlen(str))
  ```
### All the tricky things to think about with arguments:
- [x]: Invalid number of arguments: less than 2 arguments or more than 3
- [x] : 3 arguments but the 3rd is not --save
- [x]: 2 arguments but a lol.cub.c file
- [x] : .cub file does not exist
- [x] : .cub is a directory

### All the tricky things to think about when parsing everything except the map:
- [x]: Something missing (R, NO, SO, S...)
- [x]: The same thing twice (two R's, two NO's...)
- [x] : Resolution with int greater than int max
- [x]: Resolution with a comma or other character inside
- [x]: Resolution with 3 digits, or a single digit, or a 0
- [x]: F or C with a missing digit, or an extra digit
- [x]: F or C with one comma less or one comma too many 
- [x]: F or C with an int greater than int max: must return an error
- [x]: F or C with a digit greater than 255
- [x] : The wrong type of identifier (X instead of R, or E instead of EA)

### All the tricky things to think about when parsing the map:
- [x]: A blank line in the map: "Except for the map itself, the information in each element may be separated by one or more spaces".
- [x]: An incorrect character in the map, such as a 4
- [x]: An open map
- [x] : "Spaces are a valid part of the map, it's up to you to manage them correctly" : for me, empty spaces are walls
- [x] : The map is before another element 
- [x] : There is no map
- [x] : No player or several players

## Step 2: The Minilibx

### Write the first pixels : 
I used this documentation at the beginning: https://harm-smits.github.io/42docs/libs/minilibx/getting_started.html

All the function documentation is here: https://github.com/qst0/ft_libgfx

First you start with mlx_init. Then you create a window with mlx_new_window. Finally you put mlx_loop to start rendering the window.
  ```
mlx = mlx_init();
mlx_win = mlx_new_window(mlx, 1920, 1080, "Hello world!");
mlx_loop(mlx);
  ```
- [x]: You'll see a window called Hello World

Next we're going to write our first pixels directly to the window using a function we've created called my_mlx_pixel_put. This is the function used in doc42 mentioned above. The my_mlx_pixel_put function is a bit cheesy but it's just for printing the first pixels, we'll see why later.
  ```
typedef struct s_data {
    void *img;
    char *addr;
    int bits_per_pixel;
    int line_length;
    int endian;
} t_data;

void my_mlx_pixel_put(t_data *data, int x, int y, int color)
{
    char *dst;

    dst = data->addr + (y * data->line_length + x * (data->bits_per_pixel / 8));
    *(unsigned int*)dst = color;
}
  ```
- [x] : You'll see pixels in your Hello World window

### Use images :
But printing pixel by pixel in the window is way too long, so we're going to use images.
First we create our image:
  ```
mlx_new_image(mlx, 1920, 1080);
  ```
How exactly do we write the pixels in this image? We'll use mlx_get_data_addr to get the memory address where to put our pixels. To find out how to write pixels to an image, I strongly advise you to have a look at: https://github.com/keuhdall/images_example/blob/master/README.md. Then you can put your pixels in the image. 
- Formula for char *addr: X position * 4 + 4 * Line size * Y position. (Thanks to grezette)
- Formula for int *addr: Y * line_length / 4 + X. (Solution I chose)
```
typedef struct s_data
{
	void *mlx_ptr;
	void *mlx_win;
	void *img;
	int *addr;
	int bits_per_pixel;
	int line_length;
	int endian;
} t_data;
 
data.addr = (int *)mlx_get_data_addr(data.img, &data.bits_per_pixel, &data.line_length, &data.endian);
data.addr[y * recup->data.line_length / 4 + [x] = color;
```

### Events (= when a key is clicked, for example) :
Hook documentation: https://gist.github.com/KokaKiwi/4052375

--> The Minilibx has a function called "mlx_hook" which allows you to add an event management function to your code. All MiniLibX hooks are nothing more than a function that is called each time an event is triggered.
  ```
int mlx_hook(void *win_ptr, int x_event, int x_mask, int (*funct)(), void *param);
  ```
--> here mlx_hook calls a function when the event x_event at the mask x_mask occurs.
 - x_event : the event code we want to manage (for example, 02: Press the key)
 - x_mask : The "mask" of the event you want to manage, I'll let you read the X manual to find out more (for example, 1L<<0 is the KeyPressMask
 - param: A miscellaneous parameter that you can pass to the function that manages the event.
 - funct: the function you run when the event occurs. There are different types of function (depending on whether it's a mouse movement, a keypress, etc.). 

### The mlx_loop_hook and mlx_put_image_to_window functions
"The syntax for the mlx_loop_hook () function is identical to mlx_hook, but the given function will be called when no event occurs."
In other words, the function called in mlx_loop_hook runs continuously. Remember to put mlx_put_image_to_window in the function you put in loop_hook, otherwise the image will not print.
  ```
int mlx_loop_hook ( void *mlx_ptr, int (*funct_ptr)(), void *param );
int mlx_put_image_to_window ( void *mlx_ptr, void *win_ptr, void *img_ptr, int x, int y );
  ```

## Step 3: The Minimap
### To do :
- Use the parsing I did in my char** map to create a minimap with the 0s, 1s and 2s each a colour
- Make one pixel = 10 pixels so that we can see the minimap correctly
- Be able to move my character with the arrows in the minimap (see the keys in step 4)
- Check whether the box I'm going to move to is a wall or not (if == '0'): if it is, I can move over it, if not, I can't.

### How can I do this with the functions I've seen before? :
- You need mlx_init, mlx_new_window, and mlx_loop of course.
- You need mlx_hook, which works for key_press and key_release, and allows you to find out whether a key has been pressed or not (see step 4).
- You need mlx_get_data_addr to retrieve the address of the image and write pixels to it.

- You need mlx_loop_hook with your function inside that prints the minimap so that as soon as there is a key press the minimap adapts.
- You need mlx_put_image_to_window

## Step 4: The keys 
### To do :
- Press escape and it exits cleanly (to exit cleanly use exit(0))
- Press left arrow : left rotation
- Press right arrow: right rotation
- Press W: forward
- Press S: move backwards
- Press A: move left
- Press D: move right

### To use :
All events or masks are available here: https://harm-smits.github.io/42docs/libs/minilibx/events.html
  ```
int mlx_hook(void *win_ptr, int x_event, int x_mask, int (*funct)(), void *param);
  ```
### Keycodes :
Linux qwerty :
- define ROTATE_LEFT 65361
- define ROTATE_RIGHT 65363
- define FORWARD_W_Z 119
- define BACK_S_S 115
- define RIGHT_D_D 100
- define LEFT_A_Q 97

Linux azerty :
- define ROTATE_LEFT 65361
- define ROTATE_RIGHT 65363
- define FORWARD_W_Z 122
- define BACK_S_S 115
- define RIGHT_D_D 100
- define LEFT_A_Q 113

Mac qwerty :
- define ROTATE_LEFT 123
- define ROTATE_RIGHT 124
- define FORWARD_W_Z 13
- define BACK_S_S 1
- define RIGHT_D_D 2
- define LEFT_A_Q 0

## Step 5: Raycasting
### The theory:
I don't know if this is the best technique, but I started by following some tutorials in javascript//tuto plus dispo . It takes time, but it turned out to be useful afterwards. These tutorials remind you of the maths and clearly explain what you're going to do. 

The basic principle is as follows:
- I send rays from left to right from the player's position. Instead of firing a ray for each pixel, we'll fire one ray per column. We launch as many rays as rx (x resolution).
- The longer it takes for the ray to reach the wall, the further away it is. The tutorials are very good for understanding how to check that the ray has hit a wall, and therefore how to calculate the player's distance from the wall for each ray.
- The greater the distance to the wall, the smaller the column of pixels.

### Practical:
I then moved on to the Lodev doc: https://lodev.org/cgtutor/raycasting.html. After the javascript tutorials and the attempts at raycasting alone, I was able to understand the Lodev doc properly. Before starting Lodev, I recommend you watch this video on vectors: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gID_FKfncZI.

##### 1. Role of variables used by Lodev:
```
typedef struct s_ray
{
	double posx; //player's x position
	double posy; //player's y position
	double dirx; //direction vector (starts at -1 for N, 1 for S, 0 otherwise)
	double diry; //direction vector (starts at -1 for W, 1 for E, 0 otherwise)
	double planx; //plane vector (starts at 0.66 for E, -0.66 for W, 0 otherwise)
	double plany; //plan vector (starts at 0.66 for N, -0.66 for S, 0 otherwise)
	double raydirx; //calculate x direction of radius
	double raydiry; //calculation of y direction of ray
	double camerax; //x point on camera plane : Left screen = -1, middle = 0, right = 1
	int mapx; //x coordinate of the square in which pos is located
	int mapy; //y coordinate of the square in which pos is located
	double sidedistx; //distance that the ray travels to the first vertical intersection point (=an x-side)
	double sidedisty; //distance that the ray travels to the first horizontal intersection point (=a y-side)
	double deltadistx; //distance that the ray travels between each vertical intersection point
	double deltadisty; //distance that the ray travels between each horizontal intersection point
	int stepx; // -1 if must skip an edge in negative x direction, 1 in positive x direction
	int stepy; // -1 if an edge must be skipped in the y direction negative, 1 in the y direction positive
	int hit; // 1 if a wall has been hit, 0 otherwise
	int side; // 0 if side x is hit (vertical), 1 if side y is hit (horizontal)
	double perpwalldist; // distance from player to wall
	int lineheight; //height of the line to be drawn
	int drawstart; //start position where to draw
	int drawend; //end position where to draw
	int x; //allows you to scroll through all the radii
} t_ray;
```
##### 2. Calculations
For each ray ray.x we will :
- Calculate stepx, stepy, sidedistx and sidedisty
- Increment as long as you haven't touched a wall: move on to the next edge in either the x or y direction.
Here you need to know that you first go to the first point of intersection, covering a distance of sidedistx and sidedisty. Then we increment by the same value: deltadistx and deltadisty.
- Calculate perpwalldist to get lineheight, then drawstart and drawend

abs = absolute value of a number cad without taking its sign into account.
sqrt = root of a number, root of 9 = 3, because 3 squared equals 9.

##### 3. Print the column of pixels

The textures must be in xpm format. These will be retrieved using the mlx_xpm_file_to_image function. 
Remember to protect your function if the xpm is bad!
```
if (!(recup->texture[0].img = mlx_xpm_file_to_image(recup->data.mlx_ptr,
	recup->no, &(recup->texture[0].width), &(recup->texture[0].height))))
	ft_error(recup, "Texture SO\n");
```
The aim is to recover the colour of the pixel at (texx;texy) in the texture in order to print the same colour in our image at (x;y). We need to retrieve the address of this image from the texture[0].addr pointer using mlx_get_data_address, and calculate texx and texy. 

```
texture[0].addr = (int *)mlx_get_data_addr(texture[0].img, &texture[0].bits_per_pixel, &texture[0].line_length, &texture[0].endian);
data.addr[y * recup->data.line_length / 4 + [x] = texture[0].addr[texy * texture[0].line_length / 4 + tex[x];
```
### Role of my variables :
```
	int texdir; //direction NO, S, EA, WE of the texture
	double wallx; // value where the wall was touched: y coordinate if side == 0, x coordinate if side == 1
	int texx; // texture x coordinate
	int texy; // y coordinate of the texture
	double step; // indicate how much to increase the texture coordinates for each pixel
	double texpos; //start coordinate
```

## step 7: Sprites
## step 8: --save
https://www.commentcamarche.net/contents/1200-bmp-format-bmp

  ```
 void ft_header(t_recup *recup, int fd)
{
	int tmp;

	write(fd, "BM", 2); //The signature (on 2 bytes), indicating that it is a BMP file using the two characters. 
			    // BM, 424D in hexadecimal, indicates that this is a Windows Bitmap.
	tmp = 14 + 40 + 4 * recup->rx * recup->ry; //The total size of the file in bytes (encoded on 4 bytes)
	write(fd, &tmp, 4);
	tmp = 0;
	write(fd, &tmp, 2); 
	write(fd, &tmp, 2); 
	tmp = 54;
	write(fd, &tmp, 4);
	tmp = 40;
	write(fd, &tmp, 4);
	write(fd, &recup->rx, 4); //The width of the image (over 4 bytes), i.e. the number of pixels horizontally (width)
	write(fd, &recup->ry, 4); //The height of the image (over 4 bytes), i.e. the number of pixels vertically (height)
	tmp = 1;
	write(fd, &tmp, 2); //The number of planes (over 2 bytes). This value is always 1
	write(fd, &recup->data.bits_per_pixel, 2); //The colour coding depth (over 2 bytes), i.e. the number of bits used 
			    		           //to encode the colour. This value can be 1, 4, 8, 16, 24 or 32
	tmp = 0;
	write(fd, &tmp, 4); //The compression method (on 4 bytes). This value is 0 when the image is not compressed
	write(fd, &tmp, 4);
	write(fd, &tmp, 4);
	write(fd, &tmp, 4);
	write(fd, &tmp, 4);
	write(fd, &tmp, 4);
}
  ```
 Warning: for the --save to work, it must pass into the raycasting functions but exit directly after the first view.

## step 9: Final small elements
- exit the program cleanly when I press the cross
  ```
  mlx_hook(recup->data.mlx_win, 33, 1L << 17, ft_exit, recup);
  ```
- if the window size is greater than the screen size, the window size must be that of the screen: special function mlx_get_sreen_size on Linux.
  ```
  mlx_get_screen_size(recup->data.mlx_ptr, &recup->screenx, &recup->screeny);
  recup->rx = (recup->rx > recup->screenx) ? recup->screenx : recup->rx;
  recup->ry = (recup->ry > recup->screeny) ? recup->screeny : recup->ry;
  ```

## step 10: Leaks
### Tools :
- Leaks: use -fsanitize=leak, and valgrind
- To use valgrind : valgrind ./executable map.cub
- Know that definitely lost must be 0. Still reachable must be about 100 blocks. Why still reachable ? Because the minilibx creates leaks. To see if the leak is in you or in the minilibx: **valgrind --leak-check=full --show-leak-kinds=all ./executable description.cub**. The little technique is to add 2> leak.log so that all the leaks are in one file, for better readability **valgrind --leak-check=full --show-leak-kinds=all ./executable description.cub 2> leak.log** (Thanks to alienard and ljurdant)
- To free something, use the if(str) exists condition, which means you have to initialise the variables you free
- NEVER valgrind + fsanitize

### Errors I've had
- Free twice
- Free without mallocating

- Free without initialising
- Write pixels outside the image

### Any malloc must be free even when :- There is an error
- There is a --save
- If there is a malloc error in a line of the map: you must be able to free the other lines.


# III - Useful things I've learnt
### Debugging techniques
- Debugging a bus error : **lldb ./executable** (be careful, I've had bus error several times when it was a segfault (Thanks to lothieve)
- Segfaults: use **-fsanitize=address** after your flags in your Makefile. If fsanitize doesn't display anything, you don't have an error.

### vim and terminal utilities
- vimrc
- dd then p to paste
- yy then p
- ctrl L to clear- find all my mallocs or all the places where a function appears: grep malloc src/* (thanks alouis)- shift g for when the finder opens and you're looking for a file 

### Git- git branch = lists existing branches http://www.letuyau.net/2012/08/git-pusher-une-branche-sur-un-repository-distant/?fbclid=IwAR1xznNq8ni4ik_GNm316yw-S1_W-zIJ6PsBbbgLsBICtnX8ez0XZNmoz6A- git push origin *branch name- git checkout *branch name* = switch to an existing branch

### Reminders about pointers
Super doc on pointers: https://www.rocq.inria.fr/secret/Anne.Canteaut/COURS_C/chapitre3.html

- int *p;- int i;- p = &i;

--> here if we write *p = 0; we change the value of i


| addr | value ||----------|-------|----------|| i | 48310 | 3 | 
| p | 48308 | 48310 || p* | 48310 | 3 |

- int *p1;- int *p2;- int i = 3;
- int j = 6;- p1 = &i;- p2 = &j;
- p1 = *p2;


| addr | value ||----------|-------|----------|| i | 48310 | 6 | 
| j | 48312 | 6 |
| p1 | 48308 | 48310 || p2 | 48305 | 48312 |

- int *p1;- int *p2;- int i = 3;
- int j = 6;
- p1 = &i;- p2 = &j;- p1 = p2;


| addr | value ||----------|-------|----------|| i | 48310 | 3 | 
| j | 48312 | 6 || p1 | 48308 | 48312 |
| p2 | 48305 | 48312 |

- int *p;
- p = malloc(sizeof(int));


| addr | value ||----------|-------|----------|| i | 48310 | 3 | 
| p | 48308 | 5368 || *p | 53608 | ?int |